
--- Page 55 ---
53
therefore the space of preference types is high-dimensional (Budish and Kessler, 2021). Em-
pirical approaches will need to consider both the problem of representing and estimating such
preferences. As discussed in Section4.3, this issue is also related to eliciting such preferences
in practice.
Competition
Oneimportantreasonwhyagentsmaycareaboutmatchesotherthantheirowniscompetitive
eﬀects, which are particularly important in settings concerning IO. For example,Uetake and
Watanabe (2020) model an entry game in the banking industry using the tools of two-sided
matching games in which a bank can enter a market by merging with an incumbent. In
this entry game, payoﬀs are aﬀected by the competitor banks that match in the market.
Similarly,Vissing (2018) models the market for oil drilling leases as a matching game between
oil companies and landlords who hold mineral rights. In this model, the terms that an oil
company can negotiate depend on their overall market presence. A challenge in these settings
is lies in ﬁnding an appropriate notion of stability that allows for externalities.28
A diﬀerent approach to the formation of partnerships has been taken in IO and the study of
vertical relationships in particular. Like in models of matching with transferable utility, these
models analyze the relationships between upstream and downstream ﬁrms. Externalities,
due to competition, are typically modeled through product market competition. Examples
include the formation of networks between health insurance providers and hospitals (Ho,
2009), and relationships between content producers and cable-television service networks
(Crawford and Yurukoglu,2012). Chapter [insert chapter on vertical relationships] provides
a more thorough review of this literature.
4 Designing Markets
This section discusses three primary goals in market design research. The ﬁrst is to diagnose
potential market failures and identify their causes. The second, complementary goal, is to
evaluate markets and compare alternative designs in an eﬀort to understand the qualitative
and quantitative eﬀects of various designs. The third goal is to propose new, improved
designs, building on what we have learned from the ﬁrst and second goals.29 The discussion
below is broader than the more speciﬁc focus on matching markets that was necessary to
keep parts II and III of this chapter self-contained.
28Conditions for the existence of stable matchings with externalities is an active area of theoretical research.
We refer the reader to Pycia and Bumin Yenmez(2021), Fisher and Hafalir(2016), and references within for
some recent results.
29Naturally, this classiﬁcation is not exhaustive and several papers often have multiple objectives. Our
hope is to organize what we see as the primary goals in market design research.
--- Page 56 ---
54
4.1 Diagnosing Market Failures
Market design researchers often emphasize that seemingly small details about market rules
can have a large impact on the ultimate performance of a market (see, for example, surveys
by Roth (2002) andKlemperer (2002)). Put another way, ﬂawed market rules can lead to
market failures. In this sub-section, we give readers a brief tour of the kinds of market
failures that have been documented. For each type of market failure, we give one or two
leading examples, and then additional literature pointers. Some types of market failures that
emerge in market design contexts will often be familiar to IO researchers.
Market Power. Exercise of market power, leading to ineﬃciency, has been documented in
a variety of market design settings in which some participants are “large,” suitably deﬁned
for the setting.
A recent example is the exertion of market power in the US Spectrum Incentive Auction
(Milgrom and Segal,2017, 2020) The auction design had the feature that it was strategy-
proof for “small” sellers — deﬁned as owners of at most a single television license per region
— to reveal their true reservation value truthfully. However, as is commonly the case in multi-
object auctions, sellers with multiple licenses could exert market power by withholding some
of their supply. This is known as “supply reduction” (or, analogously, “demand reduction”)
in the literature (Ausubel et al.,2005, 2014).
Many broadcast television licenses were indeed owned by relatively small ﬁrms, e.g., the
local NBC aﬃliate, making this feature that the auction was strategy-proof for small sellers
desirable. However, after the auction was announced but prior to its taking place, some
private equity ﬁrms aggregated broadcast television licenses from multiple sellers in a given
region. This allowed them to then exert market power, by holding back some of the licenses
from the auction. Doraszelski et al. (2019) estimate that payouts to station owners were
higher by between 7-20% as a result of this exercise of market power.
This episode illustrates the importance of considering the “larger game” in which a particular
market design takes place (Roth,2018). It also echoes the guidance ofKlemperer (2002) that
in auction design, traditional IO issues such as market power, collusion, and entry can be
as important as market design per se. Milgrom (2020) emphasizes that the ineﬃciency
and increase in costs caused by this outside-the-game move, while worse than nothing and
arguably preventable, should be considered relative to the magnitudes of the eﬃciency gains
from the reallocation of spectrum and the revenue realized by the federal government.
Collusion. Centralized assignment mechanisms have sometimes been viewed with suspi-
cion as a tool for facilitating collusion. In 2003, a group of former medical residents sued
several medical associations and the National Residency Matching Program (NRMP) for ﬁx-
ing residency salaries at below competitive levels (Jung et al. versus Association of American
--- Page 57 ---
55
Medical Colleges et al., 2002). The NRMP uses the Roth and Peranson (1999) algorithm,
which is a variant of the Gale-Shapley Deferred Acceptance Algorithm, to place newly minted
medical school students at residency programs. The plaintiﬀs argued that the match serves
as a coordination device that is used to prohibit bargaining and to keep salaries low. In a
brief submitted on behalf of the plaintiﬀs, Orley Ashenfelter argued the work done by med-
ical residents is similar to that of nurse practioners, suggesting that a perfectly competitive
market would result in salaries for residents that are approximately $40,000 higher.
A subtlety in this market, relative to other labor markets, is that hospitals set salaries
uniformly across all of their residency positions, and do so before knowing which particular
residents they will be matched with. Bulow and Levin(2006) analogize the restriction on
salaries with having to oﬀer the same salary for Barry Bonds (one of the greatest baseball
players of all time, modulo subsequent concerns about performance-enhancing drug use) as
for Mario Mendoza (a player who somehow became famous for mediocrity). They showed
that this feature can depress and compress salaries relative to a competitive equilibrium.30
The suit was dismissed following an exception to antitrust law enacted by Congress in 2004,
but left open the question of whether the design of the match is responsible for low salaries.
Empirical studies, however, suggest that the match may not be directly responsible for low
salaries. Niederle and Roth(2003a) show that salaries at medical fellowship markets that
operate with and without the match are similar.Agarwal (2015) provides a rationale for
this result, arguing that much of the salary gap arises due to market power issues that are
unrelated to centralization. Medical residency programs have a limited number of accredited
positions. Residents value training at these programs and are willing to take a salary cut. In
particular, prestigious programs can reduce their salaries without substantially aﬀecting the
quality of residents they attract. Using estimates of residents’ willingness to pay for training
at various programs,Agarwal (2015) estimates that more than half of the salary gap can be
explained by an implicit tuition for training at desirable programs. This gap would remain
even in the absence of a match.
There have also been numerous studies of collusive behavior in auction settings. To name a
few, Friedman(1991) famously alleged collusion in the market for US treasury bonds, which
ultimately led to a market-design change from pay-as-bid to uniform-price;Porter and Zona
(1993) demonstrate bid rigging in highway procurement auctions; and Klemperer (2002)
describes some famous examples in the 1990s spectrum auctions.
Rent Seeking. Budish et al.(2015) study rent seeking in the context of high-frequency
trading and modern ﬁnancial markets. They show that the design of modern ﬁnancial ex-
30It is worth emphasizing that the restriction on the salaries is not due to centralization per se.Crawford
(2008) proposes a design reform that would allow both sides of the market to submit ranks that depend on
various salary levels. Such a design could approximate competitive outcomes, although it may be burdensome
to implement.
--- Page 58 ---
56
changes, in which time is continuous and orders are processed serially (i.e., one-at-a-time)
creates arbitrage opportunities that are a pure contest in speed. For example, if the S&P 500
futures contract goes up in price, this will lead to an arbitrage opportunity to buy S&P 500
exchange traded funds. These arbitrage opportunities in turn induce a socially-wasteful rent
seeking competition. In equilibrium, the marginal ﬁrm’s expenditure on speed leaves them
with zero economic proﬁt, just as in a standard rent-seeking tournament.
Leslie and Sorensen (2014) study rent seeking in the context of the market for concert tickets.
In that market, ticket brokers often race to purchase underpriced tickets, with the intent of
reselling in the secondary market. Leslie and Sorenson build a structural model in which
they can quantify both the rent-seeking aspects of ticket resale and the potential for eﬃ-
ciency gains from reallocation. Bhave and Budish(2018) study the mid-2000’s introduction
of primary-market auctions to the event ticket market by Ticketmaster, and, by matching
primary-market auction data to secondary-market resale values from eBay, ﬁnd that the auc-
tions eliminated the scope for broker rents (as auctions should). Interestingly, however, the
primary-market auctions were abandoned by Ticketmaster, who around the same time made
a big push to enter the secondary-market — and hence get a piece of the resale rents them-
selves (Budish,2019). Other useful references on this market, which has long captured the
attention of economists, includeCourty (2003, 2019); Sweeting (2012); andKrueger (2019).
Other recent studies that relate to rent seeking and market design include:Hakimov et al.
(2019) on black markets for appointment slots, and andBudish (2018) on the rent-seeking
tournament by bitcoin miners.
Participation and Entry. An important requirement for successful design is that agents
have incentives to participate in the market. Otherwise, potentially valuable transactions
will not be realized. In fact,Bulow and Klemperer(1996) show that securing an additional
bidder’s participation in a standard auction without a reserve price increases revenue more
than using the optimal auction. The message is that participation is more important than
optimal design.
The need to encourage participation has guided design in other contexts as well. Central-
ized matching mechanism design implicitly acknowledges this goal via emphasis on stable
matching mechanisms. A mechanism that satisﬁes this property reduces the incentives for
agents in the market to match outside the mechanism or to disobey proposed assignments.
But satisfying this property is not always without costs as relaxing this requirement can
often enable more eﬃcient matches if other aspects of agent behavior can be held ﬁxed.31
Nonetheless, stability is considered an important property in part because empirical obser-
vation suggests that markets that do not produce stable outcomes often collapse because
agents start transacting outside the system (Roth,1991, 2002, 2008).
31For example, in a school choice model,Kesten (2010) shows there are no strategy-proof mechanisms that
are both stable and eﬃcient.
--- Page 59 ---
57
Market Fragmentation. Non-participation or partial participation can have particularly
stark consequences because a fragmented marketplace can make it hard to ﬁnd all potential
transactions. Ashlagi and Roth (2014) and Agarwal et al. (2019) analyze this problem’s
causes and consequences in the living donor kidney exchange market. This market enables
transplants for patients with kidney failure who have willing but incompatible living donors.
Kidney exchanges are facilitated by individual hospitals or one of three large multi-hospital
platforms. Thus, it is more eﬃcient to co-ordinate exchanges via the large multi-hospital
platforms because they can explore a greater set of potential transactions.
Unfortunately, a design ﬂaw in the mechanism used by the platforms is partially responsible
for the fragmented market structure. Speciﬁcally, the design gives incentives to the hospitals
to retain some of their easiest-to-match patient-donor pairs and match them with hard-to-
match pairs. This internal matching is instead of registering both pairs with a platform,
causing fragmentation. The ﬂaw in the design can be remedied by instituting incentives
via priorities for patients at hospitals that participate to a greater extent. In addition to
this problem, fragmentation may also result from unreimbursed ﬁxed and variable costs of
participating in a platform. Agarwal et al.(2019) estimate that proper co-ordination can
result in more than a 30% increase in the total number of kidney exchange transplants.
Realizing these gains would require addressing fragmentation by using either a mandate or
both reimbursement reform and a redesign of the platform’s algorithm. Both approaches
bring up important and subtle issues that are left for future research.
Similar market fragmentation has also been documented and analyzed in the context of
Chilean higher education (Kapor et al.,2020b). A centralized admissions system is used by a
large number of prestigious colleges in Chile but a signiﬁcant portion of the higher education
sector does not participate on the platform. Frictions in the market result in ineﬃcient
clearing because admissions across the two paths to colleges are not well coordinated. Using
estimates of a model that combines preferences and student achievement eﬀects, they show
the beneﬁts of eliminating this market fragmentation.
Investment and Innovation. Chapter [insert chapter on innovation by Williams] pro-
vides a survey of the literature on incentives for innovation. One recent study that relates
speciﬁcally to innovation in the context of market design isBudish et al. (2020). It uses
theory and data to study the industrial organization of modern electronic stock exchanges,
and uses the model to understand the incentives of exchanges to innovate on their market
designs in ways that reduce some of the harms associated with high-frequency trading. One
conclusion is that private innovation incentives diverge from social incentives, because ex-
changes earn economic proﬁts in the status quo from selling inputs into the arms race for
trading speed. Innovating to address the negative aspects of high-frequency trading would
undermine this source of economic rent.
As Budish et al.(2020) point out, in many of the market design implementations that are
--- Page 60 ---
58
well known to the literature — spectrum auctions, the medical match, school choice, kidney
exchange, course allocation — the entities making adoption decisions are governments or non-
proﬁt organizations. In this context, where the key players are for-proﬁt ﬁnancial exchanges,
private innovation incentives will play a role in whether socially optimal market designs
are implemented. This intersection of IO, market design and innovation incentives seems a
fruitful space for future research.
A diﬀerent question concerns the incentives of participants in a designed marketplace to
undertake costly investments, e.g., in increasing their values or reducing their costs. There
is a classic result in the context of Vickrey auctions that, under some conditions, private
investment incentives are socially eﬃcient (Rogerson, 1992). The reason is that the Vickrey
auction implements the socially eﬃcient allocation in an incentive-compatible manner by
giving each agent their marginal contribution to social welfare as private surplus (e.g., in a
single-object private-values auction, the highest bidder gets as surplus the diﬀerence between
their value and the second highest-value, which exactly aligns private and social incentives
to increase one’s private value). A recent paper of Hatﬁeld et al. (2021) extends this idea
to a more general mechanism design environment that includes many auction and matching
problems as special cases.
Search Costs.
The baseline theoretical and empirical models assume away costs of participating in central-
ized marketplaces. However, real-world markets are characterized by frictions that are costly
to overcome. For example, students and their parents spend time and eﬀort learning about
schools in their district. And, schools and employers exert eﬀort in evaluating applicants.
These frictions can result in suboptimal outcomes that can be important to manage.He and
Magnac (2020) argue that increases in evaluation costs associated with making it easier for
students to submit a large number of applications may outweigh the improvements in match
quality. One way to mitigate this externality is to levy appropriately calibrated application
fees.
In other cases, applicants may be applying to too few options because of costly search. This is
especially true if evaluating and processing applications imposes negligible costs, as is the case
in many centralized school choice systems. Using detailed data from the application process
and a survey conducted right after applications are submitted,Arteaga et al.(2021) show
that over-optimism about admission chances results in sub-optimally low search and too few
school options being ranked. As a remedy to the resulting market failures, they demonstrate
the value of matching platforms with personalized warnings for applicants whose tentative
rank-order list leaves substantial estimated risk of non-placement.
Strategic Misreporting. Most market designs encountered in the literature have the
property that, if participants report their preferences truthfully, the market will produce an
eﬃcient allocation, suitably deﬁned given the context.
--- Page 61 ---
59
However, many market designs used in the world induce participants to strategically mis-
report their preferences, sometimes signﬁcantly, and this can lead the market to produce
allocations that are eﬃcient with respect to the reported preferences, but ineﬃcient with
respect to the underlying truthful preferences.
An early suggestive example in the matching literature isRoth (1991), which shows that
medical specialties that used a matching algorithm called the priority match, as opposed to
deferred acceptance, often abandoned their match, suggesting ineﬃciency. Also suggestive
was early evidence on the Boston mechanism for school choice, for examplePathak and
Sonmez (2008), which provided various forms of anecdotal evidence about some parents
strategically misreporting their preferences while other parents participated more naively. In
the next subsection, we discuss empirical work that has documented how agents behave when
confronted with a manipulable school choice system. This work also quantiﬁes the eﬀects of
this manipulation by comparing this mechanism to strategy-proof alternatives.
Concrete quantiﬁcation of the harms from strategic preference misreporting is provided in
Budish and Cantillon(2012). The context of that study is course allocation at Harvard Busi-
ness School (HBS). HBS uses a mechanism colloquially known as a “snake draft”, in which
students take turns choosing courses one at a time, with the order reversing in each round
(thereby “snaking” up and down the list of students, see Section2.3.6). That mechanism
provides incentive to strategically misreport, so as not to waste early round draft choices
on courses that could be safely obtained in later rounds. The authors have both the actual
(potentially strategic) reported preferences, as well as data on students’ underlying truthful
preferences from an administrative survey. These data are used to directly document that
students strategically misreport their preferences in the direction suggested by the theory,
and to calculate the eﬀects of strategic misreporting.
4.2 Evaluating and Comparing Designs
In order to understand how market design may aﬀect outcomes, it is important to compare
existing designs to each other and to alternatives. The theoretical literature has found that
it is often hard to simultaneously satisfy all the properties a designer might like to (see
Vulkan et al., eds,2013 and Roth, 2018). For cases where comparing two mechanisms may
be theoretically ambiguous, it is valuable to quantify these mechanisms’ eﬀects on various
dimensions, for example, in terms of participant welfare.
The body of work discussed below highlights that detailed market rules interact with em-
pirical research in three diﬀerent ways. First, formally adopted mechanisms often yield data
that enable empirical approaches. Second, the appropriate empirical approach depends on
the rules adopted in the market. Third, this work can shed light on the quantitative eﬀects
of various rules and identify potential reforms.
--- Page 62 ---
60
School Choice.
Perhaps the most widely studied empirical problem is school choice design (seePathak, 2017
and Agarwal and Somaini,2020 for more complete surveys). This emphasis is partly because
administrative data from school districts has been more readily available, but also because
methods for school choice settings are comparatively better developed. The methodological
advances in this area have been enabled by a relatively straightforward link between the type
of preference data available (rank-order lists) and single-unit discrete choice demand models.
Moreover, a detailed understanding of student priorities and the assignment process is helpful
in developing approaches that are well-tailored to the empirical setting.
School choice reforms have aimed to coordinate admissions via formal matching mechanisms
in order to increase allocative eﬃciency. But understanding the quantitative eﬀects of cen-
tralizing admissions requires data from a system without a formal choice process, and such
data are hard to come by.Abdulkadiroglu et al.(2017b) use the implementation of the New
York City High School assignment system to quantify the welfare eﬀects of centralized school
assignment. They ﬁnd that, following the reform that centralized the assignment process,
students were more likely to enroll in their assigned school and exits from the public school
system fell. Their analysis also compared the new DA-based system to the old system and al-
ternatives motivated by matching theory. On a scale ranging from a no-choice neighborhood
assignment to the utilitarian optimal, the new system realized 80% of the potential gains,
whereas the old system achieved one-third at most. Other ordinal mechanisms studied in the
theoretical literature were within a few percentage points, suggesting that the primary gains
arise from coordinating assignments. Thus, centralization and coordination are of ﬁrst-order
importance relative to the diﬀerences between well-designed alternatives.
A related issue in designing school choice mechanisms is comparing manipulable and non-
manipulable systems. Although the theoretical literature advocates strongly for the strategy-
proof Deferred Acceptance mechanism, commonly used manipulable alternatives such as the
Immediate Acceptance mechanism cannot be ruled out based on theory alone (Abdulka-
diroglu et al., 2011). The empirical literature has shed light on the comparison between
these two mechanisms. Student welfare has been compared using various agent behavior
models, ranging from equilibrium play (Agarwal and Somaini,2018) and models that allow
for mistaken reports (Calsamiglia et al.,2020; Agarwal and Somaini,2018; He, 2017; Hwang,
2014) to models of heterogeneous beliefs estimated using survey data (Kapor et al.,2020a).
These papers largely ﬁnd that the average student welfare is higher under IA if students’
behavior is described by equilibrium play, but the diﬀerence is small at best (Agarwal and
Somaini, 2018; Kapor et al.,2020a). Survey evidence also suggests that many students are
mistaken about their admission chances or the mechanism used, which can further weigh
against IA (He,2017; Kapor et al.,2020a). Thus, mistakes and agent behavior are important
factors in a design’s eﬀects.
Practical experience with implementing school choice mechanisms and the data that have
--- Page 63 ---
61
been generated has also revealed new design issues that need evaluation. For example,
districts have implemented school choice menus to manage transportation costs (Shi,2015).
Districts have also used multi-stage clearing processes with a restricted the number of choices
in order to simplify the process and to provide information about school competition (Ajayi
and Sidibe,2021; Luﬂade, 2019). Understanding these designs’ eﬀects requires careful empri-
cal work. More broadly, a mechanism and priorities should be designed keeping the objective
function of the school district and any constraints on the allocation in mind. Indeed,Shi
(2021) develops an approach for this objective that uses estimates of preferences as an input
into the design problem.
Another issue uncovered via practical experience is that students in large districts ﬁnd it
daunting to evaluate and rank many schools (Arteaga et al., 2021). This can result in
numerous students remaining unmatched and some appealing their initial assignments after
learning more about their assigned school (Narita,2018). Managing such mismatch requires
careful thinking about after-market design and the process through which students acquire
information. Appropriately designing a mechanism with such issues in mind requires a deeper
understanding of how the implementation of a mechanism aﬀects incentives for acquiring
information and engaging in search (Immorlica et al.,2020).
Dynamic Assignment Mechanisms.
An important class of markets are ones in which agents and objects that need to be allocated
arrive over time, rather than simultaneously as in school choice. Such markets include public
housing (Waldinger,2021), deceased donor organs (Agarwal et al.,2021), hunting licenses
(Verdier and Reeling,2021), and foster care (Robinson-Cortés,2019). In most of these cases,
objects must be assigned to agents without full knowledge of which agents or objects will be
availableforassignmentinthefutureeitherbecausewaitingiscostlyorstorageisnotpossible.
For the designer and the empirical researcher, this adds another challenge in addition to the
considerations in static settings discussed above.
Recent methodological research has made some progress on these issues. A challenge with
designing practical mechanisms is that it is rarely feasible to elicit agents’ preferences over
all potential objects and their assignment time. This curse of dimensionality results in much
coarser information that a mechanism can use to allocate objects. For example, on the
organ waitlist, patients can either accept or decline an organ oﬀer. In the latter case, they
are exercising the option of waiting for another oﬀer. Consequently, unlike school choice,
administrative data from these systems also do not allow for a direct comparison between any
two objects. The empirical approaches mentioned above adapt models of dynamic discrete
choice (Pakes,1986; Rust, 1987; Hotz and Miller, 1993) and dynamic games (Bajari et al.,
2007) in order to infer the comparison between two objects. Like school choice, these methods
also leverage the detailed understanding of the assignment process that a formal mechanism
aﬀords.
Commonly studied designs often involve waitlists with agents who are oﬀered objects in a
--- Page 64 ---
62
priority order as they arrive. Each agent can be assigned at most one object, and they may
either accept or decline an oﬀer in the hope that a preferable object will be oﬀered in the
future. A number of papers have studied how to prioritize agents on this list. For example,
one could organize the waitlist according to a ﬁrst-come ﬁrst-served principle or a last-come
ﬁrst-served protocol. Theoretical results suggest that the comparison between these two
simple mechanisms is sensitive to the nature of preferences in the market. Consider that
if preferences are largely idiosyncratic, then a ﬁrst-come ﬁrst-served protocol is preferable
(Bloch and Cantala, 2017). This mechanism induces agents at the top of the list to be
selective and only accept objects that are a good match for them. However, if objects are
vertically diﬀerentiated, then a last-come ﬁrst-served system is preferable because it reduces
selectivity and minimizes waste (Su and Zenios,2004). This conclusion is special to the model
withverticallydiﬀerentiatedpreferencesbecausewhoisassignedtheobjectisinconsequential.
In other cases, mechanisms other than these two polar extremes can be preferable (Leshno,
2019).
These ﬁndings suggest the need to understand the distribution of preferences when rec-
ommending a design. The detailed administrative data collected during formal assignment
processes provide a path to achieving these ends. This recent body of empirical work has
used such data to build an empirical approach to addressing the design problem. For exam-
ple, Agarwal et al.(2021) study the assignment of deceased donor kidneys to patients with
kidney failure. They use data on the decisions made by agents in this market to estimate
preferences as a function of patient-donor characteristics. The results are then used to design
priority rules for the waitlist to maximize patient welfare. In a related study of the assign-
ment system for public housing,Waldinger(2021) explores how leaning on choices versus on
priorities aﬀects the trade-oﬀ between allocative and targeting eﬃciency.
While patients waiting for a kidney and public housing applicants are typically assigned to
only one object from the list, in certain contexts agents demand assignments of multiple
goods over time. A theoretical literature studies how optimal mechanisms in these contexts
signiﬁcantly diﬀer from waitlists and usually involve explicit incentives to decline an object
(see Guo and Horner,2018, and references therein). A real-world example of such a design is
the allocation of bear hunting licenses. Many states use a lottery system in which an agent
who is not assigned a license during a particular season gains priority in the next season
(Verdier and Reeling,2021).
Alternative Approaches to Evaluating Mechanisms.
The discussion above focuses on studies that are based on methods described in Part III
of this chapter. These studies involve using data generated by one mechanism to project
counterfactual outcomes in another using a structural model of preferences and behavior.
Yet in some instances, empirical analysis is possible by either directly describing mechanism-
generated data or using surveys. These studies often compare outcomes from two diﬀerent
designs observed in the same market or cases when a counterfactual mechanism is straight-
--- Page 65 ---
63
forward to simulate. Examples of these studies include Niederle and Roth(2003b), which
measures mobility in the gastroenterology fellowship market that abandoned a centralized
matching procedure between 1997 and 1999; Budish and Cantillon (2012), which studies
a course allocation program by surveying participants to obtain truthful preference data
and simulate counterfactuals; andPrendergast (2021), which describes how trade patterns
changed after food banks adopted a new market design. The next subsection describes some
of these applications in greater detail.
Policy Evaluation using Data from Centralized Marketplaces.
Centralized marketplaces are also an ideal laboratory for studying questions beyond the
immediate purview of market design. They are unique repositories of detailed and adminis-
trative data on market participants and their outcomes. Moreover, the rules governing these
markets are well-understood.
A small empirical literature has taken advantage of this conﬂuence of data and a grasp of
institutional detail to address questions central to health and education economics. To name
a few examples,Hastings et al.(2009) investigates the importance of socio-economic hetero-
geneity in preferences in explaining inequality in enrollment at good schools;Abdulkadiroglu
et al.(2017a) uses randomization inherent in a school choice mechanism to evaluate school
quality in Denver; andAgarwal (2017) compares policies (ﬁnancial incentives and quantity
regulations) for increasing the supply of medical residents in underserved rural areas. Need-
less to say, it is important to pay careful attention to the market’s design when formulating
an empirical strategy for policy evaluation. Just as the eﬀects of market power are interme-
diated through the design of the market, so is the eﬀect of policy reforms such as incentives.
Therefore, understanding how a market’s design shapes the eﬀect of a policy can enable novel
empirical strategies.
Evaluating Non-Utilitarian Objectives.
Most of the aforementioned work evaluates mechanisms based on traditional (utilitarian)
notions of agent welfare. However, the need for market designers to devise mechanisms that
can be deployed in the real world has also motivated research that directly evaluates other
objectives (not necessarily utilitarian) that are important to policymakers. For example,
public housing authorities value targeting allocations to the neediest, which may be at odds
with allocative eﬃciency (Waldinger, 2021). Similarly, organ allocation authorities value
survival outcomes or transplanting the urgently sick (Agarwal et al.,2020). In addition,
distributionalissuesacrossdemographicsareoftencentraltothetypesofproblemsconsidered
(Dworczak et al.,2021). On the empirical side,Tanaka et al.(2020) studies the eﬀects of
centralized assignment on meritocratic admissions and long-term student outcomes. An open
area of future research is designing mechanisms that directly incorporate these considerations.
An empirical analysis that evaluates market performance using non-utilitarian outcomes re-
quires methods for measuring the eﬀects of changing assignments on these outcomes. For
--- Page 66 ---
64
example, we need to estimate how alternative school assignments aﬀect student achievement,
or how alternative organ waitlist designs will aﬀect patient survival. The empirical challenge
is that agent choices may be correlated with outcomes (Roy, 1951). As is well-known, the
resulting selection problems can bias observational estimates. Agarwal et al. (2020) combine
a model of choices and outcomes in an assignment mechanism to estimate treatment eﬀects
as a function of observed and unobserved agent and object heterogeneity. The approach tai-
lors methods from a large literature on estimating treatment eﬀects using quasi-experimental
variation (Imbens and Angrist,1994; Heckman and Vytlacil,2005; Heckman and Navarro,
2007) to the context of an assignment mechanism. Using this approach, Agarwal et al.
(2020) estimate that improved assignments can increase patient survival on the deceased
donor waiting list by several years. Insights from these methods have also been used by
Kapor et al.(2020b) to show that improving the coordination of college admissions in Chile
lead to increased on-time graduation rates.
4.3 Proposing New Market Designs
A third objective of market design research, as the term suggests, is to propose new market
designs. Often, diagnosing failures of an existing market (per Section4.1), and evaluation
of the performance of existing market designs (per Section4.2), are key inputs into this
step. This section brieﬂy describes some economist-proposed market designs for real-world
settings.
Medical Match. Each year, the National Residency Matching Program (NRMP) matches
approximately 25,000 newly minted graduates of medical schools to training positions at
hospitals called residencies. Both residents and residency programs are unique, diﬀering in
quality and idiosyncratic ﬁt, much like many other labor markets or educational markets.
But, unlike the vast majority of labor markets, the institution is centralized. Each side of
the market – residents and programs – submits a rank-ordered preference list of agents on
the other side to a centralized clearinghouse that uses an algorithm to determine the ﬁnal
matches.
Amazingly, the NRMP ﬁrst implemented the Gale-Shapley matching algorithm in the 1950s
— well before Gale and Shapley did their research (by all accounts, Gale and Shapley were
not aware of this usage of the algorithm in practice). This independent discovery of the
algorithm, by practitioners as opposed to game theorists, is remarkable, and perhaps speaks
to the algorithm’s intrinsic beauty and appeal.
Roth and Xing(1994) report on the nature of the medical job market in the 1940s, prior
to the adoption of a centralized matching algorithm. The market was decentralized and
residency programs vied for the best medical students by oﬀering some positions earlier than
--- Page 67 ---
65
their competitors in order to gain an edge. This process unravelled to the point that some
students were oﬀered positions several years in advance of their graduation. Such early
matching can be ineﬃcient for a variety of reasons. As just one example, medical students’
preferences over the various ﬁelds of medicine may not be fully formed before students are
able to do rotations across specialties, which is part of medical school training.32
Roth (1984) ﬁrst reported on the connection between Gale and Shapley (1962) and the
NRMP, and, moreover, noted some potential problems that were starting to emerge with the
algorithm. As women were admitted to medical schools in greater numbers, starting in the
1960s and especially the 1970s, it became more and more common for medical residents to be
married couples, seeking a pair of positions. But, the Gale-Shapley algorithm treated each
worker as their own individual.Roth and Peranson(1999) proposed a modiﬁcation of the
Gale-Shapley algorithm which allowed for married couples to participate in the match in a
way that, with high probability, would yield a stable match (seeAshlagi et al.,2014; Kojima
et al.,2013).
Notably, for IO readers, direct empirical evidence on the welfare gains of the match has been
somewhat elusive. Some indirect evidence comes from the fact that the algorithm has been
maintained in the market for so long, and that specialties that adopted diﬀerent, non-stable
algorithms, have tended to abandon those non-stable algorithms in favor of Gale-Shapley or
Roth-Peranson (Roth,2002). There is also indirect evidence from an interesting case study
in gastroenterology, which, for idiosyncratic reasons, went back and forth between utilizing
a centralized match and a decentralized market (Niederle and Roth,2003b), and from the
context of matching college football teams to bowl games (Fréchette et al.,2007). But, there
is no direct evidence that speaks to the overall social welfare eﬀects of the centralized match
as researchers have not yet found a way to get enough grip on the counterfactual.
School Choice. In an inﬂuential paper, Abdulkadiroglu and Sonmez (2003) introduced
matching students to schools as a market design problem; documented that some school
districts were using the “Boston mechanism” (aka Immediate Acceptance algorithm) which,
as discussed above in Section2.3.2, is strategically manipulable; and proposed variations on
the deferred acceptance algorithm and top-trading cycles algorithm as a theoretically superior
alternative. Since that paper, the theoretical literature on school choice has been very active,
and many school districts have adopted deferred acceptance (the adoption of top trading
cycles has been more mixed, as discussed shortly). A useful survey isPathak (2011).
Here we emphasize a few observations about this literature, and the role it is played in
market design reform. As discused above in Section4.2, several papers have used modern
structural IO methods to compare mechanisms. One design takeaway from these papers is
32This would be like having to decide whether or not to be an IO economist before taking the second-year
ﬁeld courses in IO.
--- Page 68 ---
66
that theequilibrium eﬃciency diﬀerences between well-designed candidate mechanisms are
rather small. This in turn then suggests that factors aside from equilibrium eﬃciency per se
are likely to be central in design decisions.
Two factors in particular seem to be central. First, thecomplexity of equilibrium behaviorin
the Immediate Acceptance mechanism, and the associated fairness costs of strategic mistakes,
appear to have been the decisive factor in economist recommendations to move away from
that mechanism. Recall that survey evidence from Kapor et al.(2020a) directly documents
the diﬃculty some families had with ﬁguring out how to play equilibrium. Yet, the Immediate
Acceptance mechanism remains widely used across the world.
Second, the key diﬀerence between deferred acceptance (which has been widely adopted)
and top trading cycles (which has not been widely adopted) is theinterpretation of priority
awarded to students based on whether they live nearby to the school (“walk zone priority”)
or have a sibling who has attended the school (“sibling priority”). The top trading cycles
algorithm treats such priorities as property rights that can be traded to secure a school the
student likes better. The deferred acceptance algorithm treats schools’ rank-orderings as
either a non-tradable property right of students, or as a preference of the school (or both,
they are diﬀerent English descriptions of the same underlying mathematics). The fact that
most school districts, when presented with deferred acceptance and top trading cycles as
economist-blessed market design alternatives, have opted for deferred acceptance over top
trading cycles, strikes us as evidence that most public school districts do not interpret such
priorities as tradable property rights. Additionally, it may be that a subset of schools have
preferences over which students enroll, and respecting these preferences is important to secure
their participation in the school choice mechanism.
A last point we emphasize, consistent with the previous, is that the evidence inAbdulka-
diroglu et al. (2017b) suggests that it is far more important for welfare to move from an
uncoordinated system to a sensibly-designed mechanism, than it is to move from a sensibly-
designed mechanism to the optimal mechanism. This result echoes the argument ofKlem-
perer (2002) in the context of spectrum auctions.
Course Allocation. Universities often place limits on the number of students who can
enroll in a particular class. This gives rise to a challenging allocation problem: how can
a university ensure that students receive schedules of courses that eﬃciently reﬂect their
preferences, in a manner that is perceived as fair, and under a procedure that is incentive
compatible? The series of papers that led to Wharton and other universities adopting Bud-
ish’s A-CEEI mechanism for course allocation usefully illustrates how market design reforms
often take multiple papers using multiple diﬀerent methodological approaches, in this case
involving theory, data, experiments, and computation (Roth,2002).
First, Budish and Cantillon (2012) used theory and data to study the draft mechanism
for course allocation used at Harvard Business School. Draft mechanisms are common in
--- Page 69 ---
67
practice (e.g., for professional sports leagues) but their theoretical and empirical properties
are not well understood. Budish and Cantillon (2012) obtained administrative data from
HBS that contained both the preferences students actually reported to the draft (potentially
strategically misreported) as well as their underlying truthful preferences, from a survey.
This data showed that students strategically misreported their preferences, as suggested they
wouldby theory(not wasting earlierdraft pickson coursesthat a student prefersbut knowsto
be unpopular). By simulating student outcomes under hypothetical truthful play of the draft,
and comparing it to student outcomes under actual strategic play of the draft, the authors
could show that strategic misreporting harmed overall student welfare — underscoring the
value of strategy-proofness. Yet, the comparison of the manipulable and manipulated draft
mechanism, to the theoretical counterfactual random serial dictatorship mechanism — which
is both strategy-proof and ex-post Pareto eﬃcient — showed the draft to be much better
for student welfare. Budish and Cantillon(2012) thus indicated that the theory literature
would have to ﬁnd some way to move beyond dictatorships, which in turn would involve
some compromise away from either strategy-proofness or ex-post Pareto eﬃciency, given the
relevant impossibility theorems.
Next, Budish (2011) proposed the A-CEEI mechanism, based in part oﬀ of the empirical
lessons from Budish and Cantillon.33 A-CEEI is approximately but not exactly ex-post
Pareto eﬃcient, approximately strategy-proof, and satiﬁes criteria of outcome fairness called
envy bounded by a single good and maximin share (now referred to as EF1 and MMS in
the fair division literature). Using the HBS data fromBudish and Cantillon (2012), and
a computational algorithm for A-CEEI developed byOthman et al.(2010), Budish (2011)
shows that the A-CEEI mechanism outperforms the draft and the dictatorship on measures
of both eﬃciency and fairness. We note that whereas in the school choice literature discussed
above, eﬃciency diﬀerences between mechanisms are fairly small, in course allocation they
are large. The intuition is that in multi-unit allocation there is a lot more scope for realizing
eﬃciency gains from trade than in allocation problems in which each agent consumes just a
single unit.
Budish and Kessler(2021) then ran an experimental test of A-CEEI at the Wharton School
at the University of Pennsylvania. The main goal of the experiment was to assess whether
market participants could report their preferences to the A-CEEI mechanism “accurately
enough” for the mechanism’s eﬃciency and fairness advantages to manifest in practice. This
question necessitated a novel style of laboratory experiment, in which subjects participated
based on their real preferences for real schedules in a simulated (i.e., unincentivized) environ-
ment, as opposed to an environment in which subjects are endowed with artiﬁcial preferences.
The evidence inBudish and Kessler(2021) suggested that students at Wharton could report
their preferences with suﬃcient accuracy, but that preference-reporting mistakes did have a
33This section reports on papers in the order they were ﬁrst completed, not the order in which they were
ultimately published.
--- Page 70 ---
68
measurable eﬀect on the market design’s performance in the lab.
Last, Budish et al. (2017) report on the actual implementation of the A-CEEI mechanism at
Wharton. This involved ﬁnalizing the preference-reporting language based on the evidence
from Budish and Kessler (2021), improving the algorithm for discovering A-CEEI prices
relative to the initial version in Othman et al. (2010), and various other kinds of work
involved in bringing a market design from theoretical idea to practical implementation.
Food Banks. Prendergast (2017;2021) reports on the implementation of a pseudomarket
mechanism for Feeding America, the national umbrella organization responsible for food
banks across the United States. The context for this market design research is that Feeding
America frequently receives donations of food (e.g., a truckload of cereal) that it has to
allocate to one of the many food banks across the United States. Previously, Feeding America
madeallocationdecisionsusinghumanjudgment—makingphonecallstovariousfoodbanks,
to ascertain who had an especially high need for the donation (e.g., based on other food on
hand at that food bank at the moment, from other sources), while also keeping track of
fairness considerations (e.g., spreading donations fairly across the country).
Together with many colleagues, Prendergast implemented a market based on an internal
currency to replace the prior process based on human judgments. This market allocated
a new internal currency to food banks across the country in proportion to estimated local
need. Then, when donations came in to Feeding America, the food banks could bid for the
donation. The highest bidder for a given donation would then receive this donation (the food
bank would be responsible for all transportation costs), and the artiﬁcial currency that was
bid would then be electronically distributed to all of the other food banks, in proportion to
their needy population. In this way, the overall level of the currency in the system stayed
constant over time, and food banks could learn, over time, the approximate costs of certain
kinds of donations. For a variety of fascinating reasons, proteins like chicken and shelf-stable
foods like pasta and cereal were richly priced in the market, whereas produce and dairy,
which perish quickly, and junk food with poor nutritional value, were very cheap.
Prendergast (2021) documents that the pseudomarket mechanism, dubbed the Choice Sys-
tem, lead to a more equitable allocation of food, more eﬃcient sorting of donations to nearby
recipients (thereby economizing on transport costs), and, perhaps most surprisingly, vertical
sorting of food banks across the country, whereby food banks with lots of other sources of
donation (e.g., in wealthy cities) used the Choice System to get a small amount of highly-
priced items (e.g., chicken) whereas food banks with fewer other sources of donation used the
Choice System to get a much larger amount of food overall, in essence “trading” their shares
of chicken for large amounts of other foods.
Financial Exchanges. Budish et al.(2015) propose a new market design for ﬁnancial ex-
changes, frequent batch auctions (FBA), to replace the continuous limit order book (CLOB)
--- Page 71 ---
69
that is widely used for the trading of stocks, futures, and other ﬁnancial assets around the
world. Budish et al.(2015) use both theory and data to critique the CLOB design and make
a case for the FBA design. Empirically, they show that market correlations break down at
ﬁne-enough time intervals (e.g., fractions of a second), leading to frequent, fairly obvious ar-
bitrage opportunities. These arbitrage opportunities in turn induce an arms race for trading
speed. The theory model shows that the arms race for trading speed in a sense is never
ending, since it isrelative, not absolute, trading speed that is essential for capturing ﬂeeting
arbitrage opportunities. More subtly, the model shows that the rents from these arbitrage
opportunities come at the expense of market participants who are providing liquidity to the
rest of the market (i.e., who stand willing to either buy or sell, at a spread). In equilibrium,
liquidity providers pass on this cost to end investors. Thus, there is an equivalence in the
model between the rents in the arms race for speed, the investments in speed, and the cost
to end investors.
The paper then uses theory to propose an alterntive market design, frequent batch auctions,
that eliminates the rents from ﬂeeting arbitrages, and in so doing ends the arms race for
trading speed and improves market liquidity. Intuitively, in a continuous market, even a one-
microsecond speed advantage (i.e., 0.000001 seconds) is enough to win the race. Whereas in
a batch auction market, even if the batch auctions occur as often as every tenth or even thou-
sandth of a second, a one-microsecond speed advantage is basically meaningless. Competition
is on price, rather than the last epsilon of trading speed.
Aquilina et al.(2021) use a novel form of ﬁnancial market data, obtained using a speciﬁc
regulatory authority of the UK Financial Conduct Authority (where Aquilina and O’Neill
are based), to measure the extent of the speed-based arbitrage opportunities suggested by
the theoretical model ofBudish et al.(2015). Speciﬁcally, the novel data is called “message
data”, which, crucially, contains messages sent by market participants wholose, not just win,
a race for a particular trade.Aquilina et al.(2021) show that, for stocks in the UK FTSE
100 index (roughly analogous to the S&P 500 index in the United States), there is about
one race per minute (537 per symbol per day), and that races constitute over 20% of all
trading volume. In the modal race, the diﬀerence in time between the winner and the loser
is between 0 and 15 millionths of a second (i.e., less than 0.000015 seconds). Races are for
small amounts per race, but, because of the volumes, they add up to signiﬁcant sums. The
authors compute that speed-based arbitrage constitutes about 33% of the literature’s main
measure of the cost of liquidity, called price impact, that implementing FBAs would reduce
the market’s cost of liquidity by 17%, and that speed-based arbitrages are worth about $5
billion per year in equities markets alone.
Budish et al.(2020) study the incentives for exchanges to innovate on their market design,
e.g., by adopting FBAs. If FBAs reduce the cost of liquidity by 17%, not to mention make the
market computationally simpler (avoiding much of the complexity of managing systems that
can manage and adjudicate microsecond-level speed races), how come exchanges have not
--- Page 72 ---
70
rushed to adopt? The answer,Budish et al.(2020) suggest, is a divergence between private
and social incentives for innovation (see chapter [insert innovation chapter by Heidi Williams]
in this volume). Speciﬁcally, incumbent exchanges earn signiﬁcant economic proﬁts from
selling speed into the speed race — e.g., selling the right to co-locate one’s own computers
next to the exchange’s computers — and would cut oﬀ this source of revenue if they adopted
a market design that stopped the arms race for speed.
Thus, market design reform in this setting may require a regulatory intervention, as opposed
to coming about purely from private sector incentives. Notably, in many of the other mar-
ket design reforms noted above — school choice, NRMP, course allocation, Food Banks —
private and social incentives to adopt a new, better market design werealigned as opposed
to divergent. A broader lesson for the market design literature, especially in its intersection
with IO, is to pay attention not just to the ideal design of market institutions, but to the
incentives of those with power to implement such market institutions.
5 Conclusion
An exciting aspect of market design research is that it involves close interaction with the real
world. Marketplaces and the rules that govern them come in all shapes and sizes. Market
designers seek to understand which rules matter. Given the myriad of rules, it is often unclear
whichonesareimportant, apointthathasbeenemphasizedbefore(see Roth2002; Klemperer
2004). This analysis requires understanding the context in which the rules operate, how they
interact with the behavior of market participants, and what works and what does not.
Not only does this engagement with real-world marketplaces improve our knowledge of mar-
kets, but it also allows us to improve markets themselves. While the starting point is often
existing market institutions, it can also begin with recognizing a gap – a problem that clearly
needs new market institutions. Design proposals can be based on mechanisms with well-
understood theoretical properties, designs imported from other other settings, or novel rules.
Both past experience and theoretical analysis play an important role in this process.
The experience acquired through the practice of market design itself creates knowledge.
Moreover, as markets mature, new issues are often uncovered that need to be addressed,
making the endeavour of market design an iterative process.34 Achieving this goal may
require a researcher to step outside the traditional bounds of the academic process. But
when the opportunity presents itself, a body of research that has ﬂeshed out practically
relevant issues is essential to bringing the knowledge of market designers to bear on reforms.
34Roth (2008) describes the evolution of kidney exchange markets from their inception. The challenges
faced by the market changed with its development, and a number issues required new solutions. Even at
a relatively advanced stage, there are new opportunities for expanding kidney exchange that require novel
market design solutions (Roth, 2018;Ashlagi and Roth,2021).